Perhaps the most important
theorem in all of statistics is
the so-called Central Limit Theorem.
For our purposes,
the Central Limit Theorem states that
the distribution of averages of iid random
variables becomes that of a standard
normal as the sample size increases.
Because it has fairly loose requirements
on the collection of populations that it
applies to, the Central Limit Theorem
applies in a nearly endless variety of
settings, and we'll go through several.
The basic result is that, if we take
an estimate like the sample average,
x bar, Subtract off its population mean,
mu, and divide by its standard error,
sigma over square root n.
That random variable limits
to that of a standard normal.
I would also add that replacing
the population standard deviation,
which is unknown by the sample
standard deviation,
which is known does not change
the Central Limit Theorem.
The most useful way we think about
the Central Limit Theorem is to say that
the sample average is approximately
normally distributed with a mean given by
the population mean and a variance given
by the standard error of the mean.
So let's go through several examples
to illustrate the Central Limit Theorem
using simulation.
First, lets start with a standard die.
What's interesting about this
conceptual experiment and
the simulation that we're going to
conduct is that imagine if you had to
simulate random normals prior
to the advent of computers.
For example, if you were a statistician
working at that time, and
you wanted to evaluate the behavior of
something like the ki squared statistic,
which is a function of
normal random variables.
So let's let out,
Xi be the outcome for die i.
And remember that the mean of
the distribution of die rolls is 3.5 and
that its variance is 2.92, so
the standard error of the mean
is square root 2.92 over n.
Lets roll n dice, take their mean,
subtract off 3.5, and
divide by 1.71 over square root n.
And repeat this over and over again.
If the Central Limit Theorem is right,
this should look exactly
like a standard bell curve.
So just to remind
ourselves what's happening?
We roll the dice 10 times
in this first panel.
We subtracted off 3.5 and we divided
by 1.71 divided by square root n.
Repeated that process over,
and over, and over again.
And the histogram displays
the distribution of the different
normalized averages that we got.
We know already that this
distribution has to be
centered around zero because we've
subtracted off the mean 3.5.
So it has to be centered around zero.
And we know exactly, what the variance
of this distribution has to
be were we to repeat this
process infinitely many times.
However, what the Central Limit Theorem
is telling us, is also the shape.
And the shape has to be
like that of a bell curve.
And because we normalized the data, it has
to be exactly that of a standard normal.
And we see that the approximation
is actually very good, even for
just ten die rolls.
For 20, it gets even better,
and for 30, it's better still.
Flipping a coin is an interesting case,
because it goes back to the original
development of the Central Limit Theorem,
as an approximation for
the distribution of sample proportions.
So let's let Xi be the 0 or 1 result of
the ith flip of a possibly unfair coin.
Then recall we usually give the notation
p-hat, as the sample proportion.
Which is simply the mean or the average,
the empirical average of the coin flip's
coding 0 as a tail and 1 is a head.
Recall that the expected
value of Xi is p and
that the variance of Xi
is p times 1 minus p.
Then the standard error of the mean, or
the standard error of the proportion
of heads p-hat is square root
p times 1 minus p over n.
So if we take the statistic p-hat,
subtract off its population mean, and
divide by its standard error,
square root p times 1 minus p over n
that should be approximately normally
distributed if n is large enough.
Now, notice, if the coin is fair,
then p is one-half.
And p times 1 minus p is a quarter,
which as a square root is one-half.
So the standard error for a fair
coin flip is 1 over 2 square root n.
So let's flip the coin n times,
take the sample proportion of heads,
subtract off 0.5 and
multiply the result by 2 square root n.
Here's the result of our simulations.
Consider the panel with ten
coin flips here on the left.
This is the result of flipping
the coin ten times, subtracting off
the population mean 0.5, and dividing
by the standard error of the mean.
Square root p times 1 minus p over n.
Doing this over, and over, and over again.
We get a good sense for
what the distribution of normalized
proportions of ten coin flips looks like.
It's centered at zero because
we subtracted off the mean and
its variance is governed by
the p times 1 minus p over n.
What this lecture is telling us is
that the distribution should be
approximately that of a standard normal.
And for reference, I drew the density
of the standard normal here.
You can see some of the discreteness,
there's only two levels for
a coin, so the ten, the average of
ten coin flips could only take so
many different combinations, and so some
of the discreteness is showing through.
But when we get to 20 or
30 coin flips, we could see that
it actually looks quite Gaussian.
I would like to emphasize that
the speed at which the normalized coin
flips converges to normality is
governed by how biased the coin is.
For example here,
I show what the simulations look like for
a probability of head 0.9.
You can see for ten, that distribution
does not look very bell shaped.
By 30, it's getting there but still
the probability's when approximated by
the normal distribution
would not be perfect.
So just keep this in mind that the central
limit theorem doesn't guarantee that
the normal distribution will
be a good approximation.
Simply that as the number of coin
flips limits to infinity eventually,
it will be a good approximation.
As a fun aside,
I wanted to talk about Galton's quincunx.
A machine that you might have seen
if you visited a science museum.
Basically, the cunx of this machine is
illustrating the Central Limit Theorem
with a game that looks
a little like Pachinko.
So here is an exampled.
What, what would happen is
a ball would come down here and
it would fall down here,
and it would hit this peg.
And then it would fully go left or
right with equal probability.
And then it would go down.
Let's say it, it went in this
direction and then it went down there.
And then it would fall left or
right with equal probability.
And eventually, the ball would
work its way down to a bin, and
it would get collected down here.
You can think of each time the ball
hits a peg and has to choose left or
right, as a binomial experiment,
a coin flip.
If it were to get all successes,
let's say,
it would head all the way
over in this direction and
if it were to get all failures, it would
head all the way over in that direction.
It would be like flipping a coin.
So each row is like another coin flip.
By virtue of the Central Limit Theorem,
we know that the proportion of heads from
a bunch of a coin flips is
approximately normally distributed.
So, we could multiply that by n and
then also conclude that the sum,
the total number of heads will also be
approximately normally distributed.
And so what you'll see at the science
museum is that the balls will collect down
here, and they'll actually draw the
relevant normal distribution, right there.
And then you'll see, as the balls collect,
they'll collect up into this in exactly,
overlay this superimposed
normal distribution.
And then when it fills up to that point
there's usually a little thing that,
that drops all the balls down and
it starts over again.
So, at any rate it's a, it's a fun idea,
Y\you can Google online and
see some examples of Galton's quincunx.
The fun application of
the Central Limit Theorem.